you
[Music]
Vyasa fashion was born on December 29th
1942 in swalla about 800 people lived in
the Jewish community of Sola
[Music]
at dawn on May 10 1940 Germany invaded
the Netherlands the Dutch army
surrendered just four days later before
the German invasion in early 1940 some
140,000 Jews lived in the Netherlands
representing close to 1.6 percent of the
population
during the Holocaust nearly one hundred
and five thousand of them were murdered
following the occupation the Netherlands
imposed an anti-jewish policy in which
Jewish civil servants were suspended
from work
a meticulous list of the Jewish
population was drawn up it was forbidden
to publish Jewish newspapers and steps
were taken to further oppress the Jews
economically culturally and socially the
second half of 1941 saw an escalation of
anti-jewish policies in May 1941 around
80,000 Jews lived in Amsterdam by that
spring the Nazis designated those
streets of Amsterdam were many Jews for
living later on some parts of the city
of Amsterdam were called the Jewish
quarter from 1942 onwards all Jews in
the Netherlands were ordered to move to
the Jewish quarter of Amsterdam
I was born in the darkest time of the
war in Holland
my parents were forced to live in the
ghetto of Amsterdam just before the
transportation to the concentration camp
in all of the rest of war and there was
no way out they tried but it was
impossible and my parents decided to
entrust me to non Jewish people and my
father contacted his wife of its boss
mrs. Frank and she arrived in the
negative and sew them together with a 17
year old daughter in April 1943 she and
a 17 year old daughter Christina Athena
venca came to the ghetto Amsterdam and
they came to get me out of this terrible
situation dinesh wanker the 17 year old
daughter took me from my parents in her
arms acting as a young mother and both
went back to Osterberg
also they gave in the east of Holland in
the Army in 1942 the Germans prepared to
expel all the Jews from the Netherlands
to extermination camps Jews were rounded
up from Amsterdam's various districts
and then transported to the first
investor bought camps in the Netherlands
between 1942 in 1944 the vesta bach
transit camp was used to transport jews
who had been deported from the
netherlands mainly to extermination
camps in eastern europe approximately a
hundred and five thousand Jews were
deported from Vesta block most of them
to Auschwitz Birkenau and Sobibor and a
minority to today's inch nut and bag and
bouncing
Neko and ami hashes today's parents were
transported to the Dutch transit camp of
Esther Bach in June 1943 one month later
they were transported from Wester bulk
to the Sobibor death camp
his mother was 24 his father 27 years
old when they were murdered at Sobibor
on July 23rd 1943 almost the entire
family perished in the Holocaust first
of all I will emphasize the enormous
love my parents had for me
- and trust me - non-jewish people I was
the firstborn and I was almost was about
four months old you cannot imagine what
it means for parents to give away your
child and especially not in a situation
as it was at that time in the Second
World War so in their home it was very
dangerous because mr. Shenker was taken
hostage the other 250 well-known Dutch
politicians and other people and mrs.
Rankin realized that it was dangerous so
she went to the Friends of her husband
mr. villain deal was the head of the
resistance in Oslo Beck he came
immediately and he said it's too
dangerous
and he took the little boy me to his
home when I arrived in his home the home
of mr. and mrs. D young mrs. the young
Marquis de Young said this boy is not
going to leave my house and that's the
way I stayed there for the whole period
of the Second World War they had already
five children of their own and they had
another Jewish teenager in hiding in the
same house the risk the people took for
taking in juice to put him in hiding was
as high as to be a Jew in those days and
the fate of them was exactly the same
not only for one person but the whole
family
[Music]
thinking of this period and what I
remember is that I was taking care of
this love I was taking in as their own
child also my siblings were my brothers
and sisters they were religious people
they were Protestant you went to church
even today I know the phrase and every
day the Bible the Old Testament came
after lunch on the table and it was
always a chapter story about what
happens that day or this week adult to
get divided and I can remember it was
September 1944 the gliders landed around
our house
but soon after they started to fight and
also not our street so we went down into
the cellar into the basement of the
house and there we were waiting what was
going on in front of the house all of a
sudden there was a big bang the house
group was hit by a bomb collapsed got on
fire and we got out of the house it was
a terrible moment in my life I still
remember that the screaming of my
sisters sometimes you know I dream about
it but we got out unharmed and for about
two weeks
we were living from basement to basement
and then afterwards we were evacuated to
Sparkle or sparklemore
is in the vicinity of Absalom in May
1945 Holland was liberated and I
remember the Canadians in their Jeep
coming up the street and I was sitting
on the shoulders of my father and
everyone was happy
singing and dancing the streets with a
lot of flags dutch flags
in May 1945 with the signing of the
German capitulation the Netherlands was
liberated from German occupation after
the liberation of the Netherlands the
only survivor of the Hershel family sees
grandmother Rebecca came to take out the
boy from his rescuers family she wanted
to raise her grandchild in a Jewish home
on the spot
I lost my family my father my mother my
siblings
it was terrible not only that when I
came to a lot of them where she used to
live I had to change my name my name was
Hank II do my was a part of the after
the old family and all of a sudden no
you name is hammer I couldn't grab it on
top of it it was forbidden to have
contact with my family with my parents
is my mother and I had to pray in a
different way in a different language
which I didn't understand at all and I
had to eat kosher my whole youth till I
was 18 was very difficult I felt alone
well I had to teach myself and I can say
that I'm lucky that I found the way
at the age of eight he found a box with
the family papers his father had sent
with him as a baby into hiding his
grandmother had kept them all those
years he started to reconstruct his
tragic family story he learned about his
father's deep dedication to the Land of
Israel and developed the same attitude
love for the Land of Israel and the wish
to live there as a free people my
parents were both Chinese already dead
entities my father go to ten degrees and
there is no page with where he doesn't
write anything about Zionism as such and
his dream was that he is going to make
aliyah together with my mother and
unfortunately it never came out and it
was remarkable that I strayed a straight
line between his thoughts about living
as a Jew in the Diaspora and my source
as being a Zionist and wanted to live in
a nasal I could have never expressed
myself much better and then after
reading one of the sentences of my
father's diary the people without a
country doesn't have a future and I am
happy that I followed actually the steps
of my parents
as a teenager he joined the Jewish youth
movement bnei akiva V married Annette in
1965 v and Annette have two daughters
Mila born in 1965 and Natalie born in
1967 in 1986 V and his family decided to
fulfill their dream and immigrated to
Israel they came from Amsterdam to the
coast of Haifa on their own yacht in
order to become citizens of Israel the
journey took them several weeks the
internet built their home in Thailand
here they live close to their daughter
Natalie and their grandchildren
throughout the years we maintained a
warm connection with the DeYoung family
whenever he visited the Netherlands he
also went to see the family that saved
his life
the DeYoung family and the shankha
family were honored as Righteous among
the Nations their names are inscribed in
Yad Vashem gardens of the Righteous
among the Nations
some years ago I went to Yama Showa here
in terment
to the primary school of my grandson and
there were over 600 youngsters from the
school righteous
now for so long Joe I never had this
feeling of to be together I never had
this beautiful you were there to relate
my story to my life is that it's
something unbelievable that my parents
there's all their love for their child
for me and trusted me two strangers we
cannot imagine what went through their
heads the moment they made a decision
the moment we handed over their baby
their firstborn baby to strangers there
are so many things that influence your
life and there are always two
possibilities you can go to the left and
you can't go to the right what what is
the right direction the right direction
is serves in what your heart tells you
we mustn't forget the past you have to
learn from it and to stop discrimination
if we want to live in a better world we
start now not in this community
he wants to be in the better world for
the next generation to come you have to
do this
[Music]
and
Oh